# How to Create an Appealing Software Engineering Resume

Job search (especially in the competitive Software Engineering field) is a
time-consuming and often stressful task. Hence it is important to optimise and
streamline each step of this task as much as possible to better the chances of
landing a good job offer.

Part of the job search procedure is to draft an appealing resume according to
certain standard protocols and format. This guideline therefore attempts to
share with your some of those protocols (along with a few tips and tricks) to
draft a resume to improve your chances of landing your ideal job offer.

## Understanding the Hiring Pipeline

Over the years as I reviewed and screened a lot of resumes, one thing is always
apparent - the applicant lacks insight of the hiring process. Hence I would like
to start this guideline by attempting to educate you about it first.

The hiring process is usually divided into multiple stages. Now the exact
pipeline is never the same and it varies depending on the size and financial
capabilities of the organisation but the core concept is pretty much very
similar.

The first stage of the hiring pipeline is when a _Hiring Manager_ (who is
usually a senior technical member of the organisation/team) requires additional
resources and prompts the HR team about the same. The HR team is provided a list
of requirements the candidate is supposed to have to fulfill the Hiring
Manager's needs. The HR then proceeds to put up a job advert on various
platforms like LinkedIn or some other platform. As soon as you apply to a job
advert through the said portal, your application (and your resume) is stored in
an _Application Tracking System (ATS)_ for further screening.

Now a common misunderstanding is about drafting resumes are that "_it should
ATS-friendly_". I do not understand where this common misconception arose but
you should be aware that the ATS is just a software to store and track
applicants to a job position. Most commonly used ATSes do not have intelligent
OCR capabilities to parse through your resume (if its in a PDF format). The
organisations which can afford to utilise ATSes with more feature-rich and OCR
capabilities are rare and not very common. To give you a heads up, the inbuilt
LinkedIn ATS does not provide any such feature and you need not worry whether
your resume will "_pass the ATS test_".

With your application (and resume) tracked on the ATS, it is the HR's call to
screen through the thousands and thousands of resume they receive each day! A
vast majority of the resumes are often spam and unrelated to the job advert.
Hence HRs are incentivised to scan a bunch of resumes/applications for not more
than a few seconds "_looking for certain keywords_". The said keywords are
chosen based on the requirements list provided to them by the Hiring Manager.
All resumes which pass this initial HR screening are forwarded to the Hiring
Manager for further review. The Hiring Manager approves a select few of those
screened resumes for an interview call (or sometimes even a quick phone
interview as is the case in smaller seed startups).

<!-- TODO (Somraj Saha): Add a mermaid diagram for more easier visual understanding of the process -->

The key takeaway here is, your resume should be optimised to showcase the best
version of you at a quick glance! Keep it in mind, the HR screening your resume
will not be spending more than 3-5 seconds of a glance reading through the
resume. You can discuss more details of yourself during the phone call or
face-to-face interview with the Hiring Manager!

## Using the Right Structure/Format for the Resume

To ensure the resume is optimised for the HR screening stage, it is important to
use a correct format for the resume. This section of the guide will walk you
through the steps to draft a resume with a correct structure. Now do note, the
structure shared here is applicable to the industries of most parts of Asia,
Western Europe and the US. If you are looking to apply elsewhere you will
probably have to perform your due research on what the accepted structure of the
resume for that particular industry is.

That said, the structure of the resume you should be working with is as follows:

1. Always start the resume with your name (in bold and prominent font size),
   contact information like email, GitHub profile, current location and your a
   phone number to reach out to you.

2. Divide the entire resume into multiple sections and each should be structured
   exactly like this:

   - Technical Skills, where you list all the skills you want to showcase.
   - Work Experience, where you share detailed description of your previous work
     experience.
   - (Optional) Projects, achievements, certifications and such where you want
     to showcase extra-curricular activities relevant to the job advert.
   - Education, where you share information about your academics.

3. Ensure your resume is read top-down like a normal book or a professional
   document. Resist the temptation to draft a resume in a column style, such
   resumes are often outright rejected!

4. Ensure chronological order of pretty much any/all relevant sections like your
   latest work experience should be on top of the previous ones. Or your latest
   education should be before the older previous one.

5. Resist the urge to prettify the resume with unnecessary details. Remember it
   is a professional document and you will not want to read such documents
   written by an amateur.

## Some Tips & Tricks to Write Professionally

As discussed in the previous section, drafting the resume professionally is very
important. This section will share some tips and tricks to create one such
professionally drafted resume.

#### Tip 1: Use the Right Font Family & Size

Please for the love of God, stick with either of this font families - Times New
Roman, Arial or any Serif-type font. Anything else and especially if it is not a
[serif-type font](https://www.myfonts.com/pages/serif-fonts) is extremely
unappealing to read!

A good font size of the general description section of the document is 10-11
points. Exception applies to the heading sections and the top of the document
where you share your personal contact details and name.

#### Tip 2: Refrain from Adding Unnecessary Fluff

Professional documents do not require to look fancy with loads of colours and an
oomph. Keep it simple and stupid (KISS) like the engineer in me would like it
as!

The most beautification you should worry about is:

1. Making sections of your resume bold and if you want to direct extra attention
   to it.
2. Using italics style on lesser prominent sections of the document.
3. Adding an underline and a blue font colour to hyperlinks to clearly
   distinguish them from the rest of the document as something of a
   point-of-interest.

#### Tip 3: Use Your Best Judgement to Add Projects/Achievements

Now adding a projects/achievements section to the resume can be quite
subjective. While you might be super proud and confident about a certain project
or achievement, others might not feel the same way about it!

I personally recommend adding such a section to the document only and only if
you feel confident you have a chance at discussing some interesting points about
it during the interview process. If you do not have something to boast about
during the interview, the space might be better utilised to describe more about
your work experience instead.

#### Tip 4: Update the Resume Very Often

Most people I know only remember about updating the resume during their job
search phase which I strongly advice against. Instead I usually recommend
maintaining a [Bragdoc](https://www.bragdocs.com) which is updated every other
day (should not take you more than a minute or two post work hours). And then
every three or so months should you pick your personal best achievement from the
Bragdoc and add it to your resume.

This way not only are you **ALWAYS** ready with a resume but you will also never
forget about an achievement you made at your workplace which could have made
your resume look quite appealing.

#### Tip 5: Perform a Customary Grammar Check

It is a major turn off and a red flag to find a resume with **loads** of
grammatical errors (keyword being loads). A professional document with
grammatical errors make it looks amateurish and the candidate as someone to be
slacking.

Take my word on it and do not make yourself a target to be joked on and just use
tools like [Grammarly](https://www.grammarly.com) &
[Hemingway Editor](https://hemingwayapp.com) or some LLM-based chat bots like
[ChatGPT](https://www.chat.openai.com) or [Claude](https://claude.ai) to review
your resume for grammatical mistakes.

## Additional Recommended Reference Materials

While the suggestions I have shared above will help you a long way ahead in
securing your next job offer by enabling you write a very professional document,
I want to share some additional resources which will provide additional marginal
benefits.

1. Use this resume template I created in Google Docs -
   [Anonymous Resume](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12jBHnaiQXpIVH91lHf3OvNA5hPdFpmi5PBK5wUE5C_0/edit?usp=sharing).

2. Get your resume reviewed from your peers. A second opinion will always polish
   out the remaining intricate mistakes here and there which you might've
   missed. Join [our Discord community](https://discord.gg/kRMQSZGzkt) & ping me
   whenever you want to for a resume review (my Discord ID - `Jarmos#8937`).

3. **ALWAYS** remember, job hunting is a numbers game! Don't lose patience and
   keep applying to jobs on all platforms you can think of. And don't hesitate
   to reach out to prospects & network with people. Be mindful though, asking
   for a job straight away might appear rude to some. See this article -
   [How to Break Into the Tech Industryâ€”a Guide to Job Hunting and Tech Interviews](https://haseebq.com/how-to-break-into-tech-job-hunting-and-interviews)
   to find some insights & lessons.
4. The
   [r/EngineeringResumes Wiki](https://www.reddit.com/r/EngineeringResumes/wiki/index/)
   .

If you feel I missed out on some advice and/or you could add additional
insights, please feel free to make a pull request or ping me on Discord!
Additionally, you can find more personal contact details about me on
[my personal website](https://jarmos.dev) if you want to reach to me privately.
